dice to seed @VERSION@
Turning dice rolls into a seed phrase, on an offline Tails machine.

This file is written for someone who does not use a terminal. Follow it in order.
Nothing here needs the internet, and nothing you do here is sent anywhere.


WHAT IS IN THIS FOLDER

  dice-to-seed-@VERSION@-x86_64.AppImage    the app
  SHA256SUMS                                 a fingerprint of the app
  start-here.sh                              checks the fingerprint, then opens the app
  READ-THIS-FIRST.txt                        this file


STEP 1. COPY THIS WHOLE FOLDER INTO YOUR HOME FOLDER

Open the Files window, drag this folder into Home, and work from the copy.

Programs are usually not allowed to run from a USB stick, so this is not optional.
Copy the whole folder, not just the app: the three files have to stay together.


STEP 2. RIGHT-CLICK start-here.sh AND CHOOSE "RUN AS A PROGRAM"

A window appears. Go to step 3.

Do not double-click this file. Double-clicking opens it in a text editor and shows you
the instructions it is written in, which is confusing and does nothing.

If "Run as a Program" is not in the menu, the file needs permission to run first:

  1. Right-click start-here.sh and choose Properties
  2. Turn on "Executable as Program"
  3. Close the window, right-click again, and choose "Run as a Program"


The app will not open if you click it directly, and that is on purpose. It is switched off
until start-here.sh has checked it. Going through start-here.sh is the whole point: it is
what turns the app on.


STEP 3. READ THE WINDOW THAT APPEARS

If it says the app has been checked, press Start and the app opens. That is all.

If it says DO NOT USE THIS FILE, then stop. The app on this stick is not the file
that was packaged with these instructions. It may have been damaged while copying,
or changed by something else. Delete it and ask the person who gave you this stick
for a fresh copy. Do not enter any dice rolls into it.


WHAT THE CHECK DOES AND DOES NOT TELL YOU

It tells you the app is exactly the file that was packaged with these instructions:
not damaged, not half-copied, not altered on the stick afterwards.

It does not tell you the download itself was genuine. The fingerprint travels in
this same folder, so anyone able to replace the app could have replaced the
fingerprint too. For that part you are trusting whoever gave you this stick and
told you it was safe. That is worth knowing rather than assuming.


IF YOU WOULD RATHER CHECK IT YOURSELF

Open Terminal, and type these two lines. The second one prints one line ending in
OK if all is well.

  cd ~/dice-to-seed-@VERSION@-tails
  sha256sum -c SHA256SUMS

The fingerprint should be:

  @SHA256@


WHEN YOU ARE USING THE APP

Use one die. Throw it, write the number on the paper sheet, then press the button
showing that face. The app never rolls anything for you and has no way to invent a
number.

The sheet is a printed page of empty boxes, which whoever gave you this stick should
have given you as well. If you do not have one, any blank paper works: rule ten boxes
per row and number the rows 1, 11, 21, and so on, which is how the app shows them.

Write every throw on the sheet as you go, and when you have finished, compare the sheet
against the screen before you press Derive. The app shows your throws in rows of ten,
numbered the same as the rows on the sheet, so read one row at a time.

That comparison is the only way to catch pressing the wrong button. Nothing else can:
every other check in this app compares your numbers against a second program, and two
programs given the same wrong number agree perfectly and give you a wallet that is not
yours.

One die rather than a handful, because with one die the order is simply the order you
threw them in. If you throw five identical dice at once and cannot tell which is which,
what you have written down is which faces came up rather than in what order, and that
is worth a third less than it looks. The app cannot tell, and the words it gives you
will look no different.


HOW TO THROW IT

On a table, not on carpet. Carpet soaks up the bounce and lets the die settle without
turning over, and a die that does not turn over can keep the face it started on.

Throw it against something: a book stood on edge, a box lid, the wall behind the table.
The die should tumble a few times and bounce at least once. Do not slide it, do not spin
it flat like a top, and do not just drop it.

The easiest way to get all of that right is a cup. Put the die in a mug you cannot see
into, shake it, and tip it out.

Decide this rule before your first throw, and then stick to it: if the die falls off the
table, ends up leaning against something instead of lying flat, or you cannot read it
clearly, that throw does not count. Throw again and use the second result.

Decide it now rather than later, because the point is that you are not choosing. A die
that rolls onto the floor has nothing to do with the number it was going to show, so
throwing again costs you nothing. Deciding to throw again because you did not like the
number you saw is a different thing, and it makes your seed weaker. So apply the rule
before you look at the face, and never delete a roll you have already entered.

Press the button after each throw, before you throw again. Then the count on screen and
the number of times you threw cannot drift apart. One roll short still gives you a
believable set of words, for a different wallet.

Roll 60 times for a twelve word seed, or 111 times for twenty-four.

Write the words down on paper. Never re-roll your dice because the numbers look
wrong: any sequence is as likely as any other, and starting again because a run
looked odd makes the result weaker rather than stronger.


WHEN YOU ARE FINISHED

Shut Tails down. It keeps nothing, so the app, this folder and everything you typed
are gone when the machine turns off. Your seed exists on the paper and nowhere else.

Destroy the sheet you wrote the dice rolls on. Burn it, or shred it and separate the
pieces. Those numbers are the seed itself, before any of the maths, so anyone who
reads them has the wallet. The sheet is not a spare copy and it is not a backup: your
backup is the words, on their own sheet, which you keep.


ONE WARNING

There is a copy of this app on a website. It is there for looking at, not for use.
Never type real dice rolls into it. Use this offline copy for anything real.
